---
title: 'HW 3: Pivots & Joins'
date: '2021-03-15'
due_date: '2021-03-21'
output: pdf_document
menu:
  assignment:
    parent: Homework
    weight: 3
type: docs
toc: yes
due_time: 11:59 PM
---

{{% div fyi %}}
# Instructions 
- Download the .Rmd template used for this homework [<i class="fas fa-file-code"></i> `here`](/homework/03-hw.Rmd)
- After completing the questions, upload both the .RMD and .pdf OR .HTML files to Canvas.
- Use tidyverse functions wherever possible. 
{{% /div %}}

- Learning outcomes:
  - Apply tidyr, readr, and dplyr capabilities
  - Select the correct parsing functions
  - Identify keys in relational database tables.
  - Manipulate data from multiple tables/data frames using dplyr functions.
  
# Scoring Rubric 

|Question.Part:|Points|Topic|
|---|--:|-------------|
|1.1|1.0|Load the data frames & explain untidy|
|1.2a|2.0|Pivot correctly|
|1.2b|1.0|week and ranking numeric, NA dropped|
|1.3|1.0|sort correctly|
|1.4a|1.0|Parse columns correctly|
|1.4b|0.5|calculate seconds|
|1.5|0.5|correct average ranking|
|1.6|1.0|correct plot and explanation|
|-|-|-|
|2.1|0.5|Identify data frames|
|2.2|1.5|correct keys identified|
|2.3|1.0|demonstrates primary keys are unique |
|-|-|-|
|3.1|0.5|Load Data and Data Frames|
|3.2a|1.0|Correct Salary DF with correct number of rows|
|3.2b|1.0|Correct Batting Stats data frame with correct number of rows|
|3.3a|2.0|Correct new DF with batting and salary info and number of rows|
|3.3b|2.0|Hex plot with variables on correct axes and correct scales. Proper Interpretation|
|3.3c|2.0|Plot with *just OLS* lines for each year on one plot. Proper Interpretation|
|3.4|2.0|Correct data in Correct Order|
|**Total**|**21.5**|



#  Billboard Data

Download the billboard dataset: [<i class="fas fa-file-csv"></i> `billboard.csv`](/data/billboard.csv)  


1. a. Use a readr function to import the billboard dataset from a data directory. 
    - The values in column `wkx` are a song's ranking after `x` weeks of being released.



    b. what makes billboard _untidy_? 

  
2. Convert all the week columns into a row for each week for each song (where there is an entry). 
    - Ensure the week and ranking are numeric (hint: _names_prefix_ & _names_transform_) and unnecessary `NA`s go away (hint: _values_drop_na_).
    - You should wind up with 5,307 rows
       
    
       
3. Sort the data by artist, track and week. 

       
4. Use a `tidyr` command to create a `minutes` and `seconds` column from the `time` column. Don't remove the `time` column (You will receive a warning which you can ignore). Create a new column called `total_seconds` with the `minutes` and `seconds` columns, calculating the total seconds each song lasts (e.g. if `time` == "4:22", then `total_seconds` == 262). 



5. Calculate the intial average billboard ranking for each song (the average ranking for the first 4 weeks after it was released (week <= 4)). However, make sure you maintain the `total_seconds` column, we will want that for plotting in question 6! 


6. Does there appear to be a relationship between song length (`total_seconds`) and intial average billboard ranking? 



#  Identifying Table Keys in the NASA Weather Dataset
- You might need to install the nasaweather package using the console
- Read the description of the nasaweather dataset with the below


```r
library(help = "nasaweather")
```
    
1. What are the data frames in this data set?




2. What are the primary keys in each data frame? (One doesn't have a key)




3. Demonstrate the primary keys generate unique rows. Note you may have to use `ungroup()` with one of them to avoid an error       
    


# Lahman's Baseball Dataset
For this exercise, we'll use the `Master`, `Batting`, `Pitching`, `Fielding`, `Teams`, `People`, and `Salaries` data frames from the `Lahman` package. 

1. Load these seven data frames into R and read about them.


2. Some players play on multiple teams each year. 
    a. Construct a data frame containing the total salary for each player for each year. Show the number of rows  - should be 26,323.
    b. Construct a second data frame containing the total number of at bats and hits for each player in a year. Show the number of rows - should be 99,402.
   

   
3. The batting average of a player is the *number of Hits divided by the number of at bats*   
    (a larger value is is better).  
    a. Using the data frames you created in part 2, create a new data frame with batting average **and** salary information for only players who had a *minimum of 400 at bats* in the years from 1985 on (when salary information started being collected). Eliminate any rows with no batting or no salary information. Show the number of rows. N Should be 5,345.  
    b. Use a hex plot to explore the association between a player's batting average (x axis) and their salary (y axis). Use a log scale for salary. Interpret the plot  
    c. Use a single (not faceted) plot of *just the Ordinary Least Squares lines* for batting average and salary to explore if this association has changed over time. Use a log scale for salary. Interpret the plot.
   
    


4. Find the annual salary of all players with first name "John" in even numbered years after 1985. 
    - Show only the first ten values arranged in descending order of salary.
    - Your output should start like this:




```
## # A tibble: 5 x 4
##   yearID nameFirst nameLast   salary
##    <int> <chr>     <chr>       <int>
## 1   2010 John      Lackey   18700000
## 2   2016 John      Lackey   16000000
## 3   2012 John      Lackey   15950000
## 4   2016 John      Danks    15750000
## 5   2014 John      Lackey   15250000
```
